---
#
#   Copyright 2023 Martín E. Zahnd
#
#   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
#   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
#   You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#       https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
#   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
#   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
#   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
#   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
#   limitations under the License.

layout: post

title: fast
author: Martín E. Zahnd

# Force custom Date (in UTC)
# Example: 2021-10-22 05:02:23 -0300
date: 2023-10-10 22:57:00 -0300
# If it was edited, put the date here
# edit:

# Space separated tags
tags: programming architecture

# Set to add KaTeX support in the html
equations: false

# Table Of Contents
toc: true
---

If your service is slow, you're in trouble.

<!--more-->

## Slow

I've been working on a project with a slow backed, a really slow one.
Sometimes it took 30 seconds to retrieve data [^cached-retrieval], which represents 3
timeouts for the server. So, in practice, it took more than 30 seconds to some things, or worse:
asking the user to "push the button" four times.
Oh, and, when I started working on this project, the app didn't handle timeouts, which is also very
important. It does now, fortunately.

[^cached-retrieval]: The same data was retrieved in 1 to 3 seconds when cached, and that's still painfully slow for a 100 KiB JSON.

This is my "first hand experience" from a technical perspective in this matter.

## Is this important at all?

Technically, no that much. _Just click it again and it works_.
But systems exist provide value to other people, call it entertainment or helping them achieve
something easily, but the mean is the same: _do something for someone_.
As such, they are always in contact with us (humans) and we don't really like waiting 30 seconds.
Not in anything tech related, at least.
This leads to angry clients, that is, people who don't like waiting or _clicking it again_
[^click-it-again], and angry clients lead to less revenue.

That's no secret, but I've seen a few small projects and big corps too not caring at all about this.

[^click-it-again]: I've notice that many users show resistance to _clicking again_ a button. The expect it to work and show a message saying "Yeap. It worked.".

## What should we do then?

First of all, handle timeouts.

They do exist, and they are not always your servers fault: maybe the user went inside an
underground parking and lost signal, maybe he or she is in a rural area without proper internet
access, who knows!
But we know that "client code" is always harder to deploy and debug than "server code", especially
in mobile devices, because they depend on the user (or the operating system, for that matter)
updating your app.

Second, take your time to analyze each request in your server and try to detect your services
bottlenecks.

And finally, invest in a better server or cloud infrastructure if needed.
For example, if your requests "were fine" but your startup just got a lot of attention and suddenly
you're serving request to 10x more clients, don't try to limit your number of instances just to save
some money.
Better keep your old and new clients happy (by serving them fasts requests) and start working on
reducing your system's bottlenecks as much as possible in the meantime.
